Hello again you splendid go to people let's finish play detection let's add line of sight into our game
and by that I'm also including by that I'm also including with that I'm also including the concept of
a maximum view distance.
Okay so just to clarify what we mean.
We talked about field of view right.
This is the field of view is the angle that you can see the line of sight is this dotted line here right
at the moment.
There is nothing between the Guard and the player.
However if you put something there the line of sight is blocked all the guard can see this wall here.
So that's what we're talking about.
So if that's the case then here's what we need for player detection.
We're gonna set up the concept of a line of sight right.
We somehow need to reach inside gotto and say draw a line from here to here and check its unbroken.
If something is in the way I can't see you return False if you're too far away.
I can't see you return false then we're gonna check if a player is in line of sight just like we did
with check if it's in the field of view and we're gonna return true or false on the entire thing.
So every frame we're going gonna check is the player and field of view and line of sight.
Okay so let's get into it.
First thing I do is wonder why we've still got this Templar character.
Let's get rid of template character template character doesn't need to be there.
And while we're at it I don't think I want to play it have a torch I'm gonna remove the torch in the
player into the blessing.
Delete the torch.
Boone save that.
Back into the template level no torch.
Great okay.
Now I need to open a camera script over the camera scene and into camera body and the play The the script.
Okay.
So the beginning of this is pretty simple right.
We're going to have to add this concept of in line of sight so every frame we're gonna process if the
player is in the field of view and player in L.A. s and that's a function of it if the brackets.
And is gonna give me an error there's no such thing called let's make one copy this control an end to
get the bottom my script make some lines he gets on doing and put it right here but pass for the moment.
Now there are a couple of ways we could do this.
Do you remember when we made the cloud that spawned lightning in Happy Days and we used a ray cost 2d
to see for something underneath.
In theory we could do that but we couldn't do that with one Ray cost.
We're going to need a whole bunch and that's gonna start slowing the game down.
Right.
If any of them are hitting the player Check every frame.
How many cameras do we have.
Even if we assume we do one per degree that's 40 different rays that feels like a really great way of
slowing our game down.
Instead we need to get into gotto and say okay.
Just draw a line from here to here.
Don't draw on the screen just draw it in the physics engine.
Okay let's do something sneaky.
I want Gordo to think about the entire environment around the entire world.
I gonna call this a variable called space.
And in that I'm going to get world 2D get well 2D is a specific function that just says Okay find world
2D what's well 2D.
Let's click on that.
The class that has everything pertaining to two dimensional world.
Right.
So the two dimensional part of the engine everything that is in 2D.
So get to that part.
And now I need to go direct space state direct space they takes a little while to get used to what this
is doing is getting the worlds physics space which allows us to do arbitrary queries for collision.
Let me put on a slide.
The world 2D is everything that is a 2D environment the 2D rendering part of the engine.
The direct space state is the physics of that right.
The 2D physics engine which allows us to do things like check that there is a line from here to here
which is exactly what we need.
OK so we have a concept called space.
Now I need a concept called l OS obstacle the line of sight obstacle and what less house.
That's a spell of so what I need to do is get space and draw a line.
OK so I'm going to use space.
Let's put that properly not intersect Ray right.
So literally draw a ray from one point to another and it's saying where are we going from.
While we're going from my global position right.
I am an NPC I am looking directly at the player.
So look from here to the player where are we going to the player.
Player dot global on the school position great an array of things to exclude.
So make an array and inside one right self.
Don't look at me.
And finally we're gonna put you can't really see it here can you.
Let's put this on the next line.
There we go.
Finally we need to put the collision layer.
Now I could write the integer for the collision layer as a bit mask but instead I'm just going to write
collision mask and this means that we're going to have to now go into the collision layers and make
sure the player's grid maps and ed pieces are on the right collision.
So let's do that
I'm going to look at my placing video into the scene to make sure that all instances of player like
this and we haven't set up any of these layers.
OK so project settings scroll down to physics to the right physics to the render to the physics.
There we go.
OK layer 1 is going to be player layer 2 is going to be tile map length Layer 3 is going to be NPC cool.
So with that done let's put the player on the player map the mask player can hit themselves they can
hit the time up they can hit the NPC.
Now let's go back to the main scene and set the collision masks for the tarmac.
So a collision.
Here we go.
You are not a player you are a tile map and you can interact with the players and the NPC is the NPC
can bump into things right.
Finally for the camera body because that's the cinematic body that set you to be an NPC and you can
interact with the player and you can interact with the tile map.
We could also have them bumping into each other.
That's a thing we could do for now.
I'm not gonna do that.
But if you want guards to be able to bump into each other just click here.
OK so emphases on the MVC layer and they can interact with either players or tile map awesome save that.
And now let's get back to a script and take a look what this means.
The concept of the line of sight obstacle is a ray from my position to the Player Position ignoring
myself using my collision mask.
OK.
So now we have a couple of things first let's put an error check in if there is no collision was for
some reason.
So if not Ello s obstacle.
Return false.
If for some reason things haven't loaded incorrectly or something slowed down let's put a little bit
of error checking.
So if he can't find a line from here to the player.
Don't even worry about it just return false it'll fix itself.
Otherwise we need a couple more points we need to figure out the distance to the player and there's
all kinds of fun that we can do with that but I'm not gonna bother with that.
I'm going to use a distance to function so let's get to player dot global position dot distance too.
And while it's the distance to meet
and now we need to do is check what's the thing you're looking at.
So if Ello s obstacle and I need the collider not the node the actual collider.
Right so collider
is the player
return True else return.
That's a weird word.
Return false.
OK.
So if the collider the collision layer of this obstacle is the play.
If you are colliding with the player then that's true.
Okay so let's double check that we have everything we need.
If you're in the field of view and you're in line of sight return true.
Let's see if that works.
OK.
That I can now hide behind objects right.
And if I get into the line of sight the camera can see me.
Now you'll notice it's a little bit off and that's because it's finding the player from the center of
the player right at the edge of the player won't count.
No I mean we could probably find a fix with that but I'm not too worried about that but this is awesome.
One thing we haven't done low is put it's got the concept of a max distance.
Now currently there's light beam is 320 pixels long then a white took me so long to find that word is
320 pixels lol.
So what we need is the concept of a maximum distance.
So my challenge for you is to add a constant called Max detection range with a value of 320 that's 320
pixels and then use it to limit the NPC is a line of sight by distance.
So little bit challenging for some people very easy for others it doesn't matter.
It's all about practice a pause the video give it a shot and when you come back I'll show you my solution
and welcome back.
So there's a few ways we can solve this but let's start by making this constant.
So I would put it right here under F of tolerance Max detection range equals 320 pixels much separate
these obviously these are color constants and these are visible things.
Wow.
Really bad speaking.
I'm a professional teacher.
Okay let's make a new variable here.
Court play out in range.
Why am I doing it this way.
It's going to be a lot more readable because here what I need is distance to play a
is less than Max detection range.
Okay now this is a true false statement either.
The distance to play it is less than the max detection range or it isn't.
So now ladies do is go and play out in range.
Okay so let's see if it's what OK.
So I can be saying I'm out of sight and I will walk back in and that shit.
Oh oh yeah.
OK.
I gave you that information that 320 is the midpoint I mean 640.
I will edit that in so you can see the problem.
But let's take a look.
Totally professional.
Everything's fine.
You can see me right to the end.
Can you see me past the end.
No.
If I walk in you can see me.
Perfect.
We now have the concept of a maximum distance and a line of sight and a field of view.
We have Ed pieces that can see the player sneak past here.
Don't mind me.
Ah I'm so sneaky like that.
We have the beginnings of a stealth game.
I'm really happy with that and that feels like a great place to end this video.
In this video we've had a quick introduction to the concept of world 2D and direct space state and using
it to check collisions and tunneling line of sight.
Really good work.
It's a little bit complicated I know.
So if you get confused we have questions awesome on discord ask them in the Q and A here.
Keep practicing.
Watch the video again if you need to.
But this is a fantastic foundation and from here on in we can start making things a little bit fancier.
Great work and I'll see you in the next video.